---
layout: post
title: "Ports"
date: 2025-11-14 12:00:00 +1000
categories: networking
---
**How Ports Work**


When sending data through a network, there are typically 3 main important parts
- Server/Client IP addresses
- Transport protocol used (TCP/UDP)
- Server/Client *ports*

To ensure data is sent to the correct place, the system needs to identify different applications on a device.

Ports are what define these specific applications. In the same way that IP addresses identify different devices, ports identify different applications on that device.

They are just reference numbers for communication - security is not involved here.

TCP and UDP ports can be any number between 0 and 65,535.

This is because the port is represented in the transport header by a 16-bit value, and the maximum number of values that can be represented with 16 bits is 2^16 (65,536). Port 0 is reserved however so there are 65,535 useable ports.

TCP and UDP ports numbers are not the same - they don't share. The port numbers are unique to each individual protocol. 

e.g. TCP port 80 is different to UDP port 80.

Some ports are permanent or *non-ephemeral* ports.
- Ports 0 to 1,023.
- *Usually on a server or service*.
- Makes reaching common services easy and removes guesswork. For example, HTTP communicates and listens on port 80 by default.
- Often called 'well-known ports'.

Some ports are temporary or *ephemeral* ports.
- Ports 1,024 to 65,535.
- *Usually on client side*.
- Selected randomly by the client just for the session. Once finished the port number is dropped and a new one is selected for a new communications session.

**Common Ports**


It is useful to be familiar with 'well-known ports' as they will be used all the time in the field.

It is especially important to understand these ports for configuring and trouble-shooting firewall rules and network issues.

Common protocols and their well-known ports include:

Port 0 - Port 100:

FTP (File Transfer Protocol)
- tcp/**20** (active mode data/active data transfer)
- tcp/**21** (admin/control)
- Transfers files between systems.
- Authenticates with username/password.
- FTP is 'full-featured': It can list directory files, add, delete and manipulate file data in other ways.

SSH (Secure Shell)
- tcp/**22** (encrypted comm link)
- Used for secure remote access and commands.
- Similar to Telnet, but encrypted.

Telnet (Telecommunication Network)
- tcp/**23** (unencrypted comm link)
- Mostly obsolete, but older systems may still use this protocol.
- Runs 'in-the-clear' but otherwise identical to SSH.

SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol)
- tcp/**25**
- Server to server email transfer.
- Sometimes used to send mail from device to server.
- Client receive mail on different protocols like IMAP or POP3.

DNS (Domain Name System)
- udp/**53**
- Converts human-readable domain names to IP addresses.

DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol)
- udp/**67**
- udp/**68**
- DHCP service runs on the network dedicated server, appliance or router.
- Server leases temporary IP addresses to network devices from a pool.
- Can be used to manually assign permanent IPs to devices like a printer or server.

HTTP/HTTPS (Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure)
- HTTP tcp/**80**
- HTTPS tcp/**443**
- Used for browser and web server communications.
- HTTP is unencrypted, HTTPS is encrypted.

----

Ports 100 - 1,023:

POP3 (Post Office Protocol v3)
- tcp/**110**
- Provides basic mail transfer

IMAP4 (Internet Message Access Protocol v4)
- tcp/**143**
- Similar to POP3 but more functionality such as management of multiple client email inboxes and syncing changes across different email clients.

SMB (Server Message Block) aka. CIFS (Common Internet File System)
- Used by Windows for file sharing and communicating between Windows devices like printers.
- In the past it used another nested protocol call NetBIOS:
- udp/**137** - NetBIOS name services (nbname)
- tcp/**139** - NetBIOS session service (nbsession)
- tcp/**445** - Direct SMB comms over TCP without NetBIOS transport. More common now in modern systems.

LDAP/LDAPS (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol Secure)
- tcp/**389**
- Used to store and retrieve information in a network directory.
- Protocol is commonly used by Microsoft Active Directory.

RDP (Remote Desktop Protocol)
- tcp/**3389**
- View, share, control and manage Windows desktops remotely.
- RDP clients also built for Linux, MacOS, iOS, etc. to facilitate cross-platform connectivity.






