---
layout: post
title: "Displays"
date: 2025-12-01 12:00:00 +1000
categories: [hardware]
---
There are different display technologies that offer differing balances of cost and performance. The main display technologies commonly used are:


**CRT (Cathode Ray Tube)**

Older technology, very uncommon these days. Works by shooting a narrow beam of electrons at a phosphor-coated screen. The phosphor glows when hit and different types of phosphor will glow in Red, Green or Blue.

- Basically obsolete now - largely replaced by LCDs around the 2000s


**LCD (Liquid Crystal Display)**

Works by shining a backlight (Fluorescent/LED) through liquid crystals and filtering the light through polarisation and colour filters. Probably the most common display technology.

PROS:
- Cheap.
- Lightweight.
- Relatively low power.

CONS:
- No true blacks due to filtered white light.
- Requires separate backlight component which can be hard to replace.

**LCD Backlights and Inverters**

- LCD displays require a backlight.
- LED backlights use DC power and laptops run entirely on DC power, so LED backlights will utilise this DC power.
- Fluorescent backlights require AC power. In this case the laptop will contain an *inverter* to change DC to AC and power the light.
- If the inverter fails, the fluorescent backlight will also fail.
- To troubleshoot a dead LCD display, you can inspect closely (ideally with a torch) and see if you can still make out text or images. If you can, the backlight is probably broken.
- The inverter can usually be replaced. It will likely be located somewhere in the display bezels.


**TN LCD (Twisted Nematic)**

Twisted Nematic is the original LCD technology. A liquid crystal layer sits between two polarisation filters in opposite alignment. Passing a voltage through the crystal layer twists the LC molecules 90 degrees vertically to align with the field. This changes whether the light of each pixel is blocked or passed by the polarisation filters.

PROS:
- Fast response (Good for gaming)
- Cheapest LCD panel.

CONS:
- Poor viewing angles.
- Poor colour accuracy.

**VA LCD (Vertical Alignment)**

Midrange LCD technology, a compromise between TN and IPS. Works by tilting the LC molecules vertically between the polarisation filters.

PROS:
- Good colour representation.
- High contrast ratio (deeper blacks).
- Midrange expensive LCD panel.

CONS:
- Slowest response
- Midway viewing angles


**IPS LCD (In Plane Switching)**

Instead of twisting the LC molecules vertically like in TN, they are rotated 'in-plane' parallel to the display panel.

PROS:
- Good colour representation
- Good viewing angles

CONS:
- Slower response (midway between TN and VA)
- Most expensive LCD panel.


**Mini LED**

This technology upgrades the LED backlight found in LCD panels, but the overall technology is otherwise the same. Mini LED increases the number of LED backlights and shrinks each LEDs individual size. Each LED can be individually adjusted. This provides broader and more granular backlight coverage resulting in better colour representation.

PROS:
- Better colour representation. Closer to OLED.

CONS:
- Bit more expensive to manufacture and power.
- Bright objects on dark backgrounds can produce a 'halo' effect.


**OLED (Organic Light Emitting Diode)**

Works by passing a current through an organic compound which makes it emit light. This removes the need for a backlight or a glass screen. Each pixel emits it's own light. A pixel can be 'switched off' entirely to represent true black. Common in mobile devices.

PROS:
- Best colour representation (Deep true blacks).
- Flexible, thin, light.
- Fastest response (Almost instant).
- Best viewing angles (relative to LCD).

CONS:
- More expensive than LCD.
- Can have a subtle flickering effect when fading brightness in certain low light conditions which some find bothersome.


**Touchscreens (Digitisers)**

Screen reponds to touch input without the need for a physical mouse/keyboard. A *digitser* is the layer in the screen that translates analogue input (like the touch of a finger or stylus) to digital signals and screen coordinates.


----


**- Display Attributes -**


Different uses and applications will require different displays, so it is important to consider the specifications and attributes of a display to ensure it is best suited for the task at hand.

**Pixel density**

Measures how many pixels are contained in a square inch or centimeter.

- Greater pixel density means higher clarity and sharpness.
- A display with the same resolution as another display but is much larger, will have a lower pixel density  as they are more spread out.
- It is also worth considering how other devices will interact with the display - e.g. Will a printer have high enough DPI to properly render and match the image we are seeing on our display?


**Refresh Rate**

The rate at which the image is built every second.

- Measured in Hz.
- 60Hz is common and less power demanding. 90Hz, 100Hz, 120Hz are also common these days.
- If you are gaming or playing rapidly moving content, the FPS you can achieve is capped by your refresh rate. 60Hz means max 60 FPS. For this reason, gaming displays are often 120Hz+.
- Maximum refresh rate is also determined by the hardware (video adaptor/processor and display device). Your hardware must support higher refresh rates.
- The connection also matters - HDMI 2.1 supports 4k at 144Hz. A different connection type might not support this combination.

**Screen Resolution**

The number of pixels in a display.

- 720p (1280 x 720)
- Full HD/1080p (1920 x 1080)
- 1440p (256 x 1440)
- 4K (3840 x 2160)

- 16:9 aspect ratio is very common.
- Another common laptop ratio is 16:10 / WUXGA (1920 x 1200)


**Colour Gamut**

The range of colours available on a display. Different standards define the range of colours a device can produce. It is important to consider what the display will be used for and if it can actually produce the colour gamut required of it. If colour accuracy is not important, it may well be worth selecting a cheaper display with a lower colour gamut.

- sRGB - Good for everyday use.
- Adobe RGB - Expanded colour space, displays meeting this standard can accurately display a wider range of colours which is important when working with photos or film.
- DCI-P3 - Similar to Adobe RGB with more of a focus on a colour space important to film.

- Low-end products might only advertise meeting 60% - 80% of a standard's specifications.
- Mid-range to high-end products will more likely meet 100% of a standard (or close to it).
- Some devices state an older standard - NTSC. 72% NTSC is roughly equal to 100% sRGB.

- OLED displays typically provide the best/widest colour gamut and offer the best standard compatibility.





